# Testing In Swift

---

## Overview

Testing in Swift is nothing new, and it’s been covered thoroughly by a number of bloggers already (I’ll reference many throughout this article). My goal with this article is to pull together some of my favorite resources and discuss some of the current strategies for testing swift code and the different types of tests you might want to consider.ms "frame" and "bounds" often refer to esting in Swift is nothing new, and it’s been covered thoroughly by a number of bloggers already (I’ll reference many throughout this article). My goal with this article is to pull together some of my favorite resources and discuss some of the current strategies for testing swift code and the different types of tests you might want to consider.

## Why Test?
Testing makes a developer’s life easier. I’ve worked on projects that were well tested and projects that had no tests written for the entire application and I’ve always preferred working on applications that were well tested and covered by different kinds of tests.


## Flavors of Testing
### Unit Tests
Unit Tests are the bread and butter of testing. If you’re not sure where to start with testing your application, this is it. Unit Tests are also a very specific kind of test. It can be easy to go off the rails here as you write tests for your application and to start writing tests that might be useful, but aren’t Unit Tests. To give you a good definition of Unit Tests here right off the bat, here’s another acronym (FIRST):

Fast: Unit Tests (in particular) should run quickly. If your test requires reading a document from the file system (for example) you should use a mocked interface instead to ensure your test runs in at most 2/10 of a second.
Isolated: You shouldn’t have to guess at the reason that a Unit Test fails, if it’s hard to figure out then it’s probably because the test isn’t isolated enough. Unit Tests should ideally test one thing. Mocking can come in handy here, though this is often especially hard in Swift.
Repeatable: Since a test should be isolated, there shouldn’t be anything affecting subsequent runs of a Unit Test. Each successive run should result in the exact same result.
Self-validating: Your tests in Swift should always use an assertion (like XCTAssert) to actually verify some result. Make sure you know what you’re testing and test it.
Timely: This Acronym was written by TDD aficionados so Timely is supposed to mean “write the test before you write any code”… I’ll leave that up to you.
source: http://agileinaflash.blogspot.com/2009/02/first.html
Why should Unit Tests be FIRST?
When we write tests for a Swift application those tests are packaged into a testing bundle.

The tests associated with that bundle can be added to a new scheme and invoked by the developer via Xcode (cmd + u), from the command line before a build, or as a step in a CI/CD pipeline prior to merging or building a new release. Because of this it’s important to have at a set of tests that can verify a level of readiness of our code very quickly. That doesn’t mean that passing all Unit Tests should indicate the 100% readiness level of our app, but it should get us as close as possible to that level of readiness while remaining FIRST.

If Unit Tests are able to remain FIRST then you will have a very portable and helpful tool for verifying the integrity of your application in many contexts: after refactoring, before accepting the pull request from an outside contributor or after making a local change to the code.

There is a danger here that the other types of tests that we’re about to talk about start to leak into your Unit Tests bundle and that is bad because other types of tests can’t be FIRST by their nature. Integration tests, for example, can’t be fast to execute or isolated because they rely on outside systems for a response. Also, integration tests don’t always say something about the state of your app. It’s possible that there was an error with the system you’re testing your integration with and not your app. For this reason especially, it’s important that Unit Tests and integration tests are not part of the same testing bundle because you’ll often want to have them run at different stages of your app’s release cycle. Unit Tests, by contrast, should be run at every stage of an app’s development and release cycle. So if you have Unit Tests that can’t be written until some other app, library or api is updated… It’s not a Unit Test.

### UI Tests
UI Tests are not Unit Tests. It doesn’t hurt to write UI Tests following the FIRST acronym guidelines, but depending on the needs of your app and your team, it’s perfectly fine to stray. For example, fast running UI Tests are always nice, but there are no UI Tests that take less than a second to complete because starting even the most bare-bones iOS app is going to take a least a second or two.

### Isolation
The isolation of a UI Test can vary. If your app doesn’t heavily rely on backend server interaction for important use cases then this won’t apply to your situation, but if using the UI of your app means interacting with a server then this section may interest you. For example, say you work on a weather app that requires the user to enter a zip code. After entering the zip code the user can see information about the weather in their area.


The user interaction here simple and it’s very easily testable because the user does something (enters a zip code) and we can test that they see the expected result (the view updates with new information about the weather).

This test can be implemented 2 different ways. We can either fake/mock the response coming back from the server that tells us about the weather at a particular zip code or we can make the actual request to the API. There are a couple of reasons why you might choose one way over the other. Here are the advantages to each approach:

### Advantages to Mocking
– Faster tests because no external server requests are actually necessary for the test
– More isolated because there is no reliance on a server being available
– Repeatable because you can always guarantee what the response for a particular API request will be.
– You can make as many test requests as you want without putting any extra load on your servers or using up API calls to a paid API

### Advantages to testing with real server requests
– Kill two birds with one stone and knock out Integration Tests with your UI Tests.
– You have an easy way to measure base line times for a user to complete a user flow so you can measure the effect changes on the backend might have to business sensitive user flows. (There are better ways to measure this if you have the time to do it right)
– If your backend team hasn’t written Integration Tests then this might be better than nothing.
– Even minimally complex server interactions can be a pain to maintain with mock responses and hitting the live API is a good alternative.

I wouldn’t really say that any of the reasons I listed under Advantages to testing with real server requests are “best practices”, but depending on your situation the tradeoffs might just make sense for your team. For the most part though, mocking your server interactions between the client and the server for UI Tests is going to be your best bet. There are a couple of ways to approach this for an iOS app.

### API Mocking Tools
OHHTTPStubs
For an iOS development team this would be my go to choice for mocking server interactions in swift. OHHTTPStubs allows you to create simple fixtures with json files for mocked responses to simulate receiving server responses without ever making a network request. OHHTTPStubs is a swift library so running it doesn’t require an external dependencies to be running simultaneously so your tests will run in Xcode locally just as easily as they will run in your CICD pipeline.

In the simple example above of a single weather API that returns weather data based on a zip code, OHTTPStubs works with little custom configuration because we can’t really take any actions from a user perspective that would change the weather. Take a banking app as an example instead. In a banking app we might have an API /savings/account/balance that returns the user’s account balance of $100. If the user were to then transfer $10 to their checking account and then call the /savings/account/balance API again we’d expect to see a result of $90. However, since we’re just using mocked responses and not a real API we’d need to mock out a separate response on the second time this API was called during our test. OHHTPStubs has affordances for handling this logic, but this is logic that will need to be maintained in parallel with changes to the server or your mocks.

WARNING: this is a road that you should think carefully about before you proceed. Writing and maintaining server mock responses and logic for even a minimally complex app can quickly grow out of control quickly. The more complex your tests are the harder it will be to maintain when changes happen on the server and the less useful your tests will be to you in the long run.

I would recommend keeping any UI test cases that require more than minimal backend logic in a separate testing bundle and scheme. In this case I would run these UI Tests against the live backend API, but I would keep the number of times these tests need to be run to a minimum. For example, you might have a pre-release set of UI Tests that verify critical user flows in full integration with the live backend API. Isn’t that an integration test you might ask? Yeah, it is. I’d consider this an end-to-end Integration Test that not only tests the integration of different modules within the iOS app, but also tests integration between the app and the backend service. This type of test would be the very tip-top of the practical test pyramid.

### Mock API Maintenance
One problem that plagues mock servers of all flavors and varieties is data rot. When mock data is first harvested from an API by saving json responses retrieved from Charles Proxy, Postman or SWHttpTrafficRecorder tests pass and everything is good. However, without fail, every API changes. Even slight changes to an API response can (in the best case) cause tests to fail or (in the worst case) not affect tests at all, but effect the way the app functions and effect users. In order to avoid mock API data rot it’s important to generate your mock server stubs in a way that is re-produceable. I haven’t really found a great solution to maintaining mock server stubs in the wild so (shameless plug ahead) I’ve created a simple open source project that makes that task much simpler. Check out Flight Recorder if that sounds useful to you and please let me know if you have any ideas or suggestions for improvement.

### iOS Integration Tests
We’ve all heard this term “Integration Tests”, but in my experience in the context of iOS development this term can have more definitions than any other kind of test. Here’s a definition I like:

“Integration tests determine if independently developed units of software work correctly when they are connected to each other.”

Martin Fowler (https://martinfowler.com/bliki/IntegrationTest.html)
So by this definition, an integration test for an iOS app could test the interaction between the app and a local database or between an app and an API. John Sundell has a great article about integration tests that’s specific to Swift and he takes the example of an integration test that verifies the interaction between an app and a database. Since he’s covered that angle I’ll take the API integration test angle.

Generally I’d suggest writing UI Tests before writing integration tests, because as I explained earlier, depending how complicated your server interactions are you might want not necessarily want to separate your UI Tests from your Integration Tests. However, if you were able to successfully mock out API interactions for your UI Tests and avoid hitting the live API, you’ll now want to write a layer of Integration Tests that will test your app’s integration with your API service layer.

As an iOS developer looking to test integration with a backend API you have a couple of scenarios. In the best case scenario, the backend service team has provided you with an API schema definition (and if it’s an internal team then hopefully you or someone on the mobile team has also been involved in the creation of the schema defining the API interface). Worst case scenario, there is no schema contract defining the interaction between your app and the backend service. If this is the case Integration Tests might save you and your team a lot of heartache (or more importantly time) when something changes unexpectedly.

### API Schema
An API schema defines a contract for the interface between a client and an API. One of the most popular schemas is the REST API contract known as the Open API Specification. Facebook’s GraphQL also has its own schema definition as does Google’s gRPC. There are plenty of ways to define an interface to an API. Regardless of which API schema is being used all schemas define what expected inputs to an API (example: URI, Method, Headers, etc) will result in a particular kind of response (example: Status Code, Headers, Body). The schema will never define exactly what data will be returned from a particular request, but it will define the “shape” of the response and as the developers of a type safe swift client app the shape of the data is very important. If a particular API is expected to return a string value and suddenly starts returning an array of string values… that’s going to be a problem. Defining this change through an API schema makes this problem much easier to handle.

Once an API schema is defined between a client and a server it’s possible to generate code to handle interactions and interface errors are much less likely. The previously mentioned schema definitions all have their own code generation approaches and if you’re generating the interfacing code between client and server then I’d argue that integration tests between these two pieces of software become almost redundant. However, even if you aren’t using any code generation for the service layers between the two applications writing Integration Tests becomes much easier because your inputs and outputs have been defined for you already. For example, given a schema for a pet store API you might have an endpoint that is defined like so:

 /pet/findByStatus:
    get:
      tags:
      - "pet"
      summary: "Finds Pets by status"
      description: "Multiple status values can be provided with comma separated strings"
      operationId: "findPetsByStatus"
      produces:
      - "application/xml"
      - "application/json"
      parameters:
      - name: "status"
        in: "query"
        description: "Status values that need to be considered for filter"
        required: true
        type: "array"
        items:
          type: "string"
          enum:
          - "available"
          - "pending"
          - "sold"
          default: "available"
        collectionFormat: "multi"
      responses:
        200:
          description: "successful operation"
          schema:
            type: "array"
            items:
              $ref: "#/definitions/Pet"
        400:
          description: "Invalid status value"
Looking at this API we know we know everything we’d need to know for our Integration Test with this endpoint. We know that we should be able to send a GET request to the /pet/findByStatus endpoint with an array of parameters: available, pending and sold. We also know that if we don’t pass a parameter the API will return us available pets by default. We can also test that, as defined in the schema, we should receive an array of Pet objects on success or an error of with status code 400 with the error message “Invalid status value” if we pass an invalid status parameter. Awesome!

### No API Schema
In the case where we have no API schema we have more work to do. This is important work because we have no contract governing our interaction with the backend api, so our Integration Tests are going to be the only line of defense between API changes and a broken customer experience. How your write your Integrations Tests will rely heavily on what your API service layer for your app looks like. If you have API logic coupled with your view logic you’re going to have to refactor. Your goal here should be to pull out any networking code into functions that can be invoked independently of any other code to make a network request to your API and return a testable result.

private func fetchWeatherForZipCode(zipCode: String) -> Promise<OpenWeatherModel> {
        let zipCodeQuery = URLQueryItem(name: "zip", value: "\(zipCode.trimmingCharacters(in: .whitespacesAndNewlines)),us")
        return APIManager().sendRequest(queries: [zipCodeQuery])
    }
view rawweatherapiexample.swift hosted with ❤ by GitHub
https://gist.github.com/normand1/588e8fd78013a6df89cb4038913e0f20
For example, the above code sample takes a zip code as a parameter and should return an OpenWeatherModel promise if successful. If the OpenWeatherModel is no longer able to be parsed from the response our integration test would fail and we’d know there had been a change to the API. Building out a few tests that simply check that the server is returning objects as expected can save a lot of time troubleshooting issues and tracking down problems, but be careful when these tests are run as they could be costing you money if they are hitting a live api!

## Conclusion
Hopefully, you’ve found some of the techniques in this article helpful. Don’t feel like you need to use all of the above techniques in your app or on your team. Some techniques are going to be more useful than others for you and your situation. The important thing is to start somewhere and build out as you go, happy testing!











